#### tableau-challenge

## How Did COVID-19 Impact Citi Bike Ridership?

Citi Bike is the largest bike sharing system in the US and services Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens in New York City as well as Jersey City, New Jersey. Not only do they provide a healthy and affordable way to get around the city, they've also been collecting the data since they started in 2013 and saving it in monthly files to be explored. This was the task at hand; explore this data with any timeline and find two phenomena--something unexpected or surprising.

### Discovery and Analysis

When I first started to download a couple files, the thought was to get the initial file from 2013 and compare those results from the latest file from October 2020. A lot must have changed including ridership and number of stations. But after some thought, I realized that maybe the 2013 data wasn't really all that relevant to today. With COVID-19 being such a part of everyday life, it dawned on me that we're looking at data from NYC which was the main hotspot for COVID last spring. The Citi Bike sharing system must've felt the effects of that with all the lockdowns and closures and it would be reflected in the data. Since a lot of businesses and industries are still either working from home or just closed for the time being like the theater district, I expected ridership to be down as well. The tour industry would be down, too. So I started looking into that data, comparing October 2019 to October 2020 (the most recent file). Much to my great surprise, ridership was actually higher in October of this year than October last year.

## Phenomenon #1 - Citi Bike Has Increesed Its Ridership Amidst the Pandemic

I downloaded the CSV files for both October 2019 and October 2020 and loaded them into *Tableau* creating a union to merge the two datasets together into one dataset. Had to do some column renaming and dataype changes but for the most part the data source was in pretty good shape. I started the visualizations with the October Totals page. I wanted to show the total ridership this year versus last year and show how much of an increase was gained, especially since that's what surprised me. 

Next I wanted to see who these riders were -- were they Customers buying a short-term pass or Subscribers purchasing annual memberships. Both types ended up showing increases. The Customers did have a bigger growth, however, just about double their 2019 numbers. Did those short-term passes lead to more trips? Did that change where they got the bike and where they road it to? This also led to my second surprise, or rather more of an interesting finding -- female ridership showed an increase in both user types. Riders who didn't specify their gender did have a significant growth in Customer rides but only minor growth in annual membership purchases. Male rider numbers actually decreased for Subscribers. But female riders showed measurable growth in both. I wasn't expecting such a difference between the three groups. With male ridership overall signficantly higher than female ridership and the closures and shutdowns impacting both males and females, I expected them both to show increases or decreases, not one have increases and the other mixed. So I knew that was my second topic to look into.

### Data Extract, Transform and Load

With these questions in mind and my second phenomenon already swirling in my mind, I knew I was going to need more data, preferably data that would show change over time, covering a few months leading up to the pandemic and then through it up to the present. *Tableau Public* also has a limit on number of rows that can be imported which I would surpass if I loaded in all the data files between October 2019 and October 2020. So I decided to import all the files into a *PostGreSQL* database, clean the data and aggregate the data there, and then export the results in a CSV file that I could then load into *Tableau* as a new data source connection. Left the original data source in there as well as not to disrupt the worksheets already created with it. This worked pretty well for the most past. Started with 17 million+ rows of data and ended up with a little over 100,000 rows. I didn't load in November 2019, December 2019 and January 2020 at first because I wasn't sure they would be needed. But as my second phenomenon took shape, I knew that data needed to be imported as well. So that was done. Had a few hiccups with updating the data source in *Tableau* since I added a *trip_duration* column when I added the extra 3 months, but that was resolved relatively quickly.

With all the new data loaded, I started using the new data source connection in *Tableau* for the rest of my visualizations. With the analysis completed of who the riders are, I wanted to find out if the stations they were using had changed in popularity. To do that, I compared the top 25 stations by number of rides for October 2020 with the numbers for those same stations in October 2019. I found that the popularity had definitely changed; some stations became much more popular whereas other stations showed a significant drop in rides starting or ending at them. I also wanted to see if that was a common outcome between an origin station comparison between years and a destination comparison. Both showed similar behavior. It may be that some previously more popular stations exist in areas of town that were closed down due to the virus. I was also curious about how the type of user played into that so I included the split between Customes and Subscribers. In many instances, there wasn't much change between the years. But there were several stations in the top 25 that had a significant decrease in Subscribers between October 2019 and October 2020. Station 519 is one that really stood out. 

Knowing which stations of the top 25 had changes, I really needed to see all the stations and number of rides laid out on a map so I could see where these stations were and what was around them. I included the option to select more than one month so it could be seen how the numbers, or in this case circles, appeared, got bigger, or stayed about the same. From the results it appears that either more stations were added farther outside the main city/Manhattan area or else more people just started taking advantage of the stations that were already close by but had not been utilized, at least not as much. When I first started analyzing this data, I thought ridership would be down with the city-wide restrictions but as I delved more into the data, I realized that bike riding is the perfect social distancing mode of transportation--usually done singularly and outdoors. Maybe seen as a better option than enclosed in a cab? This may also partially explain the shift in station popularity.

## Phenomenon #2 - Women in Particular Showed an Increase in Ridership Amidst the Pandemic

As was stated previously, I was not expecting to see an increase in female ridership during this period. I expected to see more of the same pattern as with the male riders. But since the number of female riders is so much lower in general, that population was the one that intrigued me the most. The first chart I created was ridership over time. Up to this point, I hadn't seen that broken out yet, especially to visually see what transpired when the city went into lockdown and how quickly ridership recovered. I also wanted to show how the female, male and not specified groups compared to each other. As expected, there was a visible drop in ridership in April as the city went into lockdown mode March 20, 2020. But the recovery was pretty swift. Female ridership had already surpassed October 2019's maximum values by June. The first drop in female ridership afterwards happened between September and October 2020 but the weather is starting to be less appealing for biking. But even that drop still ended with ridership above the count from October 2019. I also included in the visualization type of user filtering as it showed some interesting information, mainly the steep jump in ridership for Customers between April and May.

Knowing there was the ridership increase, I wanted to find out if anything changed with the rides themselves, specifically the duration of a trip. I charted the average duration time but included the number of rides above it so could see what the ridership numbers were like as the trip duration averages played out. I also grouped the male and not specified riders together to focus mainly on the female riders. Interestly, ride duration started to increase around January 2020 and was actually increasing when ridership counts were decreasing in March and April. Type of user was again included as more interesting results were shown; Customer riders have much longer ride times than Subscribers. I'm not sure what to make of those results as Customers get charged more after a 30-minute ride. Subscriber trip duration patterns mirror each other for the most part between female riders and males and the not specifieds. If the city does have an outreach ridership program to entice more female riders, it seems to be working.

## Dashboards and the Story

Two dashboards were created, one for the overall ridership phenomenon and the other specifically for female ridership. All of these charts and graphs were already analyzed above so nothing to really get into for the dashboards other than the filtering on the right side filters all the graphs on the dashboard if that filter was included in the stand alone visualization. Also, there wasn't enough real estate to include the map in the Ridership dashboard without scrolling so that could not be eliminated while still being able to actually view the map.

The story was laid out mainly in the order that went along with my thought process through this project. The initial page shows just the totals for rides between 2019 and 2020 which isn't all that interesting visually, except those numbers are what triggered this entire analysis so they seemed significant enough to me to lead off the story.

## City Officials Map

The *City Official Map* is very similar to the *Map of Ridership*. However, this map allows the user to select only one month at a time. A station's popularity is shown by both color and size of the circle. The darker blue the circle is, the more popular that station is. The larger the circle, also the more popular the station is. To see the popularity of all the start, or Origin, stations, that option can be selected under the Station Type. To see all the end, or Destination, stations and their popularity, choose Destination. One observation about the popularity of stations. There was a large shift in popularity of stations in Lower Manhattan to stations more north between March and April. This was quite possibly a reflection of the city's lockdown. By October 2020, the trend seems to be shifting back to Lower Manhattan. Some stations' popularity hasn't changed all that much throughout the timeline. But those stations are at ferry terminals or other mass transportation locations. Ridership around Central Park also seems pretty consistent. 

COVI-19 may have slowed down many aspects of everyday life; Citi Bike wasn't one of them. Keep on biking!
